Subject: Re: Career Advice
Date: Tue, 05 Mar 2002 13:10:22 -0500
From: Vince Scheib
To: ---------

Hello David, sorry for the slight delay in responding. I'm usually very
prompt. No problem answering questions, lets see:

> 1) On average, how long do computer programmers work a week?

In the game industry, it is typical for programmers (and artists) to
work more than average. Americans work more hours a week than people in
many other countries already. Typically, "full time" is defined as 40
hours a week. However, most people work more than that, perhaps 50
hours? (If you need exact numbers, you may try searching the internet
for more information). The game industry, however, typically works even
more, 60-70 hours a week.

Additionally, towards the end of a game a development team will go into
"crunch mode". Then, everyone is working all the time -- stopping only
for a little sleep. This may last a month or more. This works out to
easily over 100 hours a week.

This is irresponsible working habits, and some game companies are
working hard to put a stop to it. They are doing this by better planning
and scheduling, and just being more mature about the whole thing.

> 2) On average, how much do computer programmers get paid?

After earning an undergraduate degree, a good programmer should be able
to find a salary of $50,000 - $65,000. Take a look at this document:
http://www.igda.org/Endeavors/Research/Salary/IGDA_Salary_Survey.pdf

> 3) What education do I need to succeed in this job?

To be a game programmer: Build strong math skills, but do not ignore
creative work such as art, theater, or video. Get an undergraduate
degree in computer science, computer engineering, electrical
engineering, something like that.  To be a "top notch" programmer,
consider a Masters degree in computer science.

Math is useful, really. If you want to know a secrete to being really
good, it is this: American schools are ok, but they do not stress the
theoretical side of things enough. If you get a stronger grounding in
hard-core math and science you will be better off. At some point, doing
things the 'smarter way' instead of the harder way means 'knowing the
math'.

BTW- you don't have to love math or focus only on it. I'm not a huge fan
of it, but I use it a lot.

> 4) What are some advantages/disadvantages of being a computer programmer?

We build things. We are sort of like mechanics who build big crazy
contraptions that do really strange things. Only we do it in the
computer. It's all "imaginary".

Being a programmer of computer graphics lets you make nice pictures.
It's very rewarding to make "cool looking" stuff. Working on games lets
you make a product many people can enjoy. Games have technical and
artistic contributions.

Disadvantages: you learn to love computers and sit in front of them all
day. You may become trapped inside and never go out. Being a programmer
is only good if it's something you enjoy doing. Otherwise it would be
horrible torture.

> 5) What do you enjoy most about this job?

Creating new things. Writing some code which makes very complicated
things happen. I'm a director -- just giving instructions on how to do
things, and the computer does them for me.

> 6) What other activities should I do to become successful at this job?

Know how to work with people. That is important for almost every job --
it's a group effort. Learn and be good at a variety of things, such as
art et cetera.

> 7) How would I get started in this field?

Study hard in school. Play games, but also study how they work. Start
making your own, even just simple ones. Read about the field. One
excellent resource is:
http://www.gamasutra.com

> 8) Does this job require a lot of travel?

No, for the most part it does not.

> 9) What stresses does this job bring?

Hard deadlines. Competition with all the other game companies.
Competition with your self, you may be a perfectionist.

> 10) Is this the kind of job where you become friends and form bonds with
your
> co-workers?

Absolutely!

Also, if you are interested in games and computer graphics, you should
learn all you can about the demo scene.
http://www.cs.unc.edu/~scheib/play/demos/index.html
http://www.scene.org/
http://www.pouet.net/

To see some quick, go to
http://www.scene.org/dog/downloads.html

--
Vincent Scheib <<><>> http://www.scheib.net/
